---
title: GraphQL Operations
description: Before you can query, you need to add data. Use GraphQL Mutations to add a user, category, posts, and sample data.
sidebar_position: 9
---

It'd be great to start by writing some queries to explore the graph of the app,
like you did in the sketches exploring graph ideas, but there's no data yet, so
queries won't be much use. So instead, you'll start by adding data.

## Add a User

GraphQL mutations have the useful property of returning a result. That result
can help your UI, for example, to re-render a page without further queries.
Dgraph Cloud lets the result returned from a mutation be as expressive as any
graph traversal.  

Let's start by adding a single test user. The user type has the following fields:
`username`, `displayName`, `avatarImg`, `posts` and `comments`, as shown below:

```graphql
type User 
}
```

In this example, the only required field (marked with `!`) is the username.
So, to generate a new user node in the graph, we only need to supply a username.  

The sample app's GraphQL API includes an `addUser` mutation, which can be used
to add multiple users and their data in a single operation. You can add one user
and their `username` with the following mutation:

```graphql
mutation 
    { username: "User1" }
  ]) 
    }
  }
}
```

The `mutation` keyword tells a GraphQL server that it's running a mutation. The
mutation (in this case, `addUser`) takes the provided arguments and adds that
data to the graph.

The mutation shown above adds a single user, `User1`, and returns the newly
created user's `username` and `displayName`. The `displayName` will be `null`
because you didn't provide that data. This user also has no `posts`  or
`avatarImg`, but we aren't asking for those in the result. Here's how it looks
when run in the Dgraph Cloud API Explorer.



## Add a category

The graph now has a single node. Next, you'll add a category using the
`addCategory` mutation. Categories are a little different than users because the
id is auto-generated by Dgraph Cloud. The following mutation creates the
category and returns its `name` and the `id` Dgraph Cloud gave it.

```graphql
mutation 
    { name: "Category1" }
  ]) 
    }
  }
}
```

When run in Dgraph Cloud's API Explorer, the mutation looks as shown below.
Note that the category's `id` is auto generated and will be different on any
execution of the mutation.




## Add Some Posts

Dgraph Cloud can do more than add single graph nodes at a time. The mutations
can add whole subgraphs and link into the existing graph. To show this, let's do
a few things at once. Remember our first sketch of some graph data?





At the moment we only have the `User1` and `Category1` nodes.  It's not much of
a graph, so let's flesh out the rest of the graph in a single mutation.  We'll
use the `addPost` mutation to add the three posts, link all the posts to `User1`, link posts 2 and 3 to the existing category, and then create `Category2`. And, you'll do all of this in a single operation using the following mutation:

```graphql
mutation 
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: 
      }
    },
    
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: { id: "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    },
    
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: { id: "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    }
  ]) 
      }
      category 
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Because categories are referenced by an auto-generated `ID`, when you run such a mutation, you'll need to make sure that you use the right id value for `Category1` --- in my run that was `0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a`, but yours might differ. In the  Dgraph Cloud API explorer, that mutation looked like this:




A real app probably wouldn't add multiple posts in that way, but this example
shows the what you can do with mutations in Dgraph Cloud. For example, you
could create a shopping cart and add the first items to that cart in a single
mutation.  

The input format to Dgraph Cloud also shows you another important property that
helps you when you are building an app: serialization of data. In general, you can serialize your data structures, send them to Dgraph Cloud and it mutates the graph. So, you don't need to programmatically add single objects from the client or work out which bits are in the graph and which aren't --- just serialize the data and Dgraph Cloud works it out.  Dgraph Cloud uses the id's in the data to work out how to connect the new data into the existing graph.

## Add sample data

You can run some more mutations, add more users or posts, or add comments to the posts. To get you started, here's a mutation that adds some more data that we can use to explore GraphQL queries in the following section.

```graphql
mutation 
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: { id: "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    },
    
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: { id: "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    },
    
      author: { username: "User1" },
      category: { id: "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    },
  ]) 
    }
  }
}
```

## GraphQL Variables

A mutation that takes data in its arguments is great to try out in a UI tool,
but an app needs to connect the data in its internal data structures to the API
without building complex query strings. GraphQL *Query Variables* let a query or
mutation depend on input values that are resolved at run-time.

For example, the following `addOnePost` mutation requires an input `$post`
(of type `post`) that it then passes as the `input` argument to the `addPost`
mutation:

```graphql
mutation addOnePost($post: AddPostInput!) 
    }
  }
}
```

Running this mutation requires a packet of JSON that supplies a value for the
needed variable, as follows:

```json

      "author": { "username": "User1" },
      "category": { "id": "0xfffd8d6ab6e7890a" }
    }
}
```

In Dgraph Cloud's UI, there's a **Query Variables** tab that you can use to
enter the variables.




GraphQL variables let an app depend on a fixed mutation string and simply inject
the actual data into the mutation when it's executed, meaning same mutation can
be used over and over with different data.

## Mutations used in the App

The app always uses GraphQL variables so that there's a small set of mutations
and the data can be supplied by serializing client-side data structures.

The app will need a mutation to add users:

```graphql
mutation($username: String!) 
  addUser(input: [{ username: $username }]) 
    }
  }
}
```

It will also need a mutation to add posts:

```graphql
mutation addPost($post: AddPostInput!) 
    }
  }
}
```

It will need a mutation to add comments:

```graphql
mutation addComment($comment: AddCommentInput!) 
    }
  }
}
```

And finally, it will need a mutation to update posts:

```graphql
mutation updatePost($id: ID!, $post: PostPatch) 
    filter: { id: [$id] },
    set: $post }
  ) 
    }
  }
}
```

The `updatePost` mutation combines a search and mutation into one. The mutation
first finds the posts to update (the `filter`) and then sets new values for the
post's fields with the `set` argument. To learn how the `filter` works, let's
look at how Dgraph Cloud handles queries.
